CrateDB is a multi-model
database.
Its strength lies in the
efficient handling of multiple
data models within the same
database and even within the
same table.
This includes structured data
such as tables, time series and
geospatial; semi structured data,
for example JSON documents; and
unstructured data including
text, binaries, images, videos
or vectors.
All of these data models can be
combined in the same record and
accessed by SQL.
This allows for complex queries
and searches over all of your
data.
In this video, we'll explore some
multi-model queries and
introduce a couple of new
concepts.
Let's get started.
Here's a multi-model query using
the community areas data set.
And here's the table schema for
the community_areas table.
The details field is an object
with a defined schema of its
own.
Recall that CrateDB also
supports dynamic schemas for
objects and that all fields will
be indexed, ensuring the best
query performance.
Inside the details object, the
description field is stored as
text with full-text indexing.
Don't forget that vector and
hybrid searches are also
possible with CrateDB.
boundaries is defined as a GEO_
SHAPE.
Shapes can be specified as
GeoJSON or in Well Known Text
format.
This query returns the community
area name and population for
community areas whose boundaries
intersect a line that represents
the path of a flight between
Chicago's O'Hare Airport and the
smaller Midway Airport, and
whose description text matches
the term historic, and which
have a population exceeding
30,000 people.
We're returning the results in
descending order of population,
and we can see that the flight
passes over three community
areas that are thought to be of
historic interest and have
sufficient population.
Here's a second query that
demonstrates some of the other
powerful features of CrateDB.
I'm using our taxi_rides and
taxis tables to find
details of which cars earn the
most money, what their biggest
single fare was, and when the
ride that yielded that took
place.
Let's look at a couple of
details.
Firstly, we're joining 2 tables.
The vehicle details come from
the taxis table and the metrics
from aggregations over the
taxi_rides table.
Remember that while CrateDB is
a distributed database, it does
support joins. With CrateDB
this sort of query is extremely
fast due to the use of columnar
storage.
Aggregation operations are fast
and efficient.
Let's run the query and find out
which taxis are the big earners.
It seems that Toyota vehicles
generate the most revenue.
Next, I'll introduce two more
features that will help you
structure complex queries in
CrateDB: Common Table Expressions
and Window Functions.
In SQL, a common table
expression, or CTE, specifies a
temporarily named result set for
use within the context of a
larger query.
Think of common table
expressions as a way to more
easily write and maintain
complex queries, especially when
there is a need to reference or
join the same data set multiple
times.
Let's demonstrate by revisiting
an example with taxi and
taxi_rides data.
Imagine we want to combine some
summary data from our taxi rides
table with data from the taxis
table.
This query tells us the number
of rides each taxi performed and
the average distance it drove.
And this query tells us the
vehicleid, make, and model of
each taxi.
Let's use a common table
expression to combine these. With
the data from the taxi_rides
table as our temporary named
result set.
CTEs are introduced using the
WITH keyword.
Here I'm defining a CTE called
ride_info containing the results
of running that first query that
we looked at, and here I'm
referring to it in the SELECT
query that also includes data
from the taxis table.
Running this query shows us some
more details about the vehicles
that have performed the most
trips.
It looks like Toyota taxis are
always out on the road earning a
living.
We can also reference CTEs in
WHERE clauses.
This query only considers those
taxis whose average ride length
was over 30 miles.
It does this by using average
miles declared in the CTE in the
WHERE clause.
A window function performs a
calculation across a set of rows
that are somehow related to the
current row.
The window in window functions
refers to that set of rows.
Window functions are similar to
aggregations, but unlike
aggregate functions, which
reduce the output into a single
row per group, window functions
return a value for each row in
the output.
In SQL, window functions are
introduced with the OVER
keyword.
Here is an example query that returns
the start time and number of
miles driven for each trip made
by one of the taxis on April the
29th, 2024.
We're using a window function to
calculate a running total of the
number of miles the taxi has
driven that day.
The running total is created by
this clause.
Here, for each matching ride,
sum is provided with the value
of miles for that ride, plus all
the rides for this cab that came
before it in the day achieved
with the ORDER BY clause.
Let's run the query and see what
it produces. We see each of
Taxi 5955's 8 trips for the
day in order with a running
total of the number of miles
driven that day after each ride.
We can use multiple
window functions in a
single query.
Consider this query, which again
shows the cumulative miles
driven by Taxi 5955 in a day,
but now also ranks those trips
by distance, with a rank of one
being the longest.
Here we use two window
functions.
The first window function uses
dense_rank to rank the results
in descending order of miles
driven, and the second
calculates our running total of
miles driven for the day as before.
When we run this query,
here's what's returned:
What if we wanted to run reports
like this for more than one
taxi?
Partitioning allows us to group
the records in a window rather
like a GROUP BY clause.
Window function is then only
applied to the matching subset.
This query returns a report
containing the cost of each ride
that a taxi performed and the
cumulative amount earned by that
taxi for the day at the
end of each ride.
We're running it for two taxis,
5635 and 3523. The now running window
function to calculate the
running cumulative earnings is
partitioned by the vehicleid.
Ensuring that only the records
for the right cab are used in
the calculation. Here is the result of
running this query.
We can see that each cab has a
separate running total for it's
earnings so far that day.
Here we have a query that
combines some of the ideas we've
been looking at for a given
taxi.
This query generates a report
showing the length of each trip
the taxi performed on a given
day, as well as running totals
for dollars earned and time
spent driving.
We've also included columns that
show whether a given trip was
the taxi 2nd, 3rd, 4th, etc.
of the day and the trip's rank
based on distance.
Let's run the query now.
We start to get a picture of what
the taxi drivers day looks like.
This sort of information is
useful for planning things like
break times, fuel stops, and
when the driver should think
about returning to the depot.
This query uses multiple window
functions with some degree of
repetition.
Here we see we're using the same
window three times.
We can factor this out by using
a named window.
This version of the query
introduces a named window w and
refers to it by name whenever we
need it.
Running this query yields the
same results as the previous
version, but our SQL is a bit
more maintainable now.
In this video we demonstrated
the power of querying a
multi-model database with SQL.
We also introduced the concepts
of window functions and common
table expressions.
I would encourage you to
experiment with these concepts
using the sample data set in
your own CrateDB cluster.